Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today
I'm joined by Doctor Mark Rank. He is Herbert
Herbert S Adley Professor of Social Welfare at the
George Warren Braun School of Social Work at Washington
University in Saint Louis. He is widely recognized as
one of the foremost experts and speakers on issues
of poverty, inequality, social justice. And today we're talking
about his latest book, The Random Factor, How Chance
and Luck profoundly shape our Lives and the world
around us. So, Doctor Rank, welcome to the show.
It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Oh, great. It's, it's fantastic to be with you.
So just to start off with, I guess that
it would be important for people who are listening
and watching to have a better understanding of what
you mean by words like random chance Luck because
sometimes it's not exactly clear what they mean, particularly
in this sort of context of your book. So
yeah, so I, I in the beginning of the
book, it's a good place to start to define
what we mean by these terms. And I think
all of them Chance Luck and randomness are related
to the idea that there are things that happen,
which cannot be predicted, which are out of the
blue. But the terms chance and luck usually refer
more to the individual. Whereas the term random or
randomness really refers more to sort of the wider
system or the structure. So we, we often talk
about chance and luck events as applying to, to
individuals. There's also a further distinction one can make
between chance and luck in that chance is a
more neutral term. Uh When we talk about chance
events happen to people that could be good, it
could be bad. When we talk about luck, we
generally refer to either good luck or bad luck.
And so it has, um it has that connotation
to it. So that's, that's kind of AAA bit
about those, those um what, what is meant by
those terms?
Mhm. Where do you think that this very common
idea? I'm not sure if we could call it
an ideology, possibly not. But this common idea that
people have that we sort of have complete control
or near complete control over what happens in our
lives. It stems from.
Yeah. You know, so, um I, you know, I'm
here in the United States and uh you know,
one of the things within the United States, one
of the sort of historical uh themes has been
the whole idea of rugged individualism, of self reliance,
of individual agency. And there's the idea that you
determine your destiny, that through your efforts, through your,
you know, your decisions, through your skills, you make
your future. And that's, that's been a real strong
emphasis here. Uh You know, II I don't feel
as confident talking about other cultural contexts, but I
know within the United States has a very strong
theme. And so, you know, one of the things
that I talk about is the idea of chance
and luck are, uh, counter to that, uh, you,
you don't have control. Now we'll talk about later.
Some of the things that you do have control
of in terms of chance and luck. But, you
know, things that are unpredictable and that can happen
to you are beyond your sort of individual agency
or individualism. So, um, so, but this idea that,
you know, that we determine our own destiny is,
is a strong theme and, and so the, the
idea in the book kind of runs cou counter
at least somewhat counter to that.
Mhm. It's very interesting that at a certain point
in your book, you go back in history a
little bit and talk about how historically people probably
have thought about luck, chance randomness in different ways.
I mean, please correct me if I'm wrong. But
isn't it the case? At least when I read
the stuff from, uh, people from more ancient civilizations
that they were more willing to acknowledge the role
that Chen and Luck played in their lives. I
mean, of course, many times they attributed that to
supernatural forces like the whims of the gods, but
at least they acknowledge that. Right.
Absolutely. Absolutely. So, you know, my, the, the first
chapter in the book is called The Wheel of
Fortune. And that comes from the goddess Fortuna in
Roman Times, in which she was. And she was
a very important, um God to the Romans. And
in fact, one of the most important because she's
the one that they thought, you know, determines helps
determine our destiny or our fortunes. And one of
the things that, that she was known for was
having a wheel of fortune and she would spin
this wheel. And uh you know, as, as Bo
Bo Boethius, you know, the, the, the Roman philosopher
wrote, she took delight in having people that were
on the top of the wheel come down and
people on the bottom come up. And so it's
this idea that, you know, chance and luck that
go around in a, in a, in a, in
a wheel. Um So, yeah, definitely, there was a
lot of emphasis on the importance of chance and
luck, particularly in ancient times. And then, you know,
as we've seen over time, that idea has kind
of gone out of style. And I would argue
now that it has come back. But for example,
in the 16th and 17th century, um you know,
the whole idea from a religious point of view
was that everything is, is preordained, that, that God
is, is ruler of all determines everything. There's no
such thing as chance and luck. And in fact,
Einstein had a famous quote where he said God
does not play with dice. Um And, and that
comes also from, uh there was also a rise
of Newtonian physics in the, in the 16th 17th
century in which the idea was that well, if
we have enough information, we can understand everything that's
going on that there are certain rules and certain
laws to nature and that all we need is
enough information. Now that goes counter again to the
idea of chance and luck. So, um so then
I talk about how it, it kind of came
back onto the scene. And, and I think one
of the real important um reasons for that was
Darwin's theory of natural selection and evolution. And that
theory is really based on the idea of random
mutation that there are random mutant and mutations are
random. They can be good, they can be bad
to, to make a long story short. His idea
was that when there are random mutations that benefit
the survival of a species, those get carried on
and that leads to to evolution. So the idea
of chance and luck came into much more into
the four than, and, and I would argue in
the 20th century, you know, with um chaos theory
and uh uh oo other aspects in, in the
science and in other places, you know, it, it's
very much a player today
uh quantum mechanics as well. Right. Absolutely.
Absolutely. I was gonna, yeah, it took the words
out of my mouth, quantum mechanics.
Uh And I mean, the example of Darwin and
the theory of evolution by natural selection is very
interesting because actually there are chance events that completely
changed how evolution played out. Like for example, in
the book, you talk about the example of the
asteroid hitting the earth and wiping out over time,
all the dinosaurs, we chill out for the rise
of mammals. And if it wasn't for that, probably
things now where they would look much different.
Absolutely, Ricardo, you and I wouldn't be here right
now if that asteroid had not hit 66 million
years ago. And, you know, some people say, well,
that was, that was predestined. Um No, I don't
think so. As the asteroid was going around, it
was pulled by some random gravitational forces and the
bottom line is had that asteroid struck 30 seconds
earlier or 30 seconds later. It probably wouldn't have
had the catastrophic effect that it had. And that
catastrophic effect wiped out 75% of the animal and
plant species on the earth, including the dinosaurs, which
then led to the rise of the mammals. But
again, imagine just a minute, one way or a
minute another way wouldn't be here right now. So,
you know, that's a, that's a very, that's one
of the most profound chance events that you can
point to um very powerful.
What about the social sciences? Because you've mentioned there
the example of uh mathematics, biology, even physics. But
in the social sciences specifically have chance and randomness
been studied seriously.
It, it, it really hasn't and it's very surprising.
Um YOU know, Newton. Newton had a famous quote
where he says, I can predict the, the, the,
the motions of the planets, but I can't predict
the, the, the, the um the madness of crowds.
Um And social science is about kind of understanding
society, understanding social groups. And it's really interesting that
there's very little written about in the social sciences
on luck and chance. And so I talk about
why that is, and I think there's a couple
of, of explanations. Um One is that in the
social sciences, you know, I come out of a
sociology background, uh We like to be able to
predict things, we like to be able to model
things and to say this thing, event A led
to event b well, by definition, randomness cannot be
predicted it's random. So it's very hard to put
into a model to pre you know, as a
variable. And so that goes counter to a lot
of social science, another um aspect for why I
think it's not looked at, uh it's not often
looked at is within, for example, sociology, we're interested
in kind of how structural forces um impact upon
life outcomes. So for example, class race, gender, those
are all important variables in terms of of life
outcomes. But to introduce the idea of chance and
randomness again, goes counter to that idea of being
able to sort of predict outcomes in people's lives.
So, you know, I i it's interesting that it
really hasn't been studied very much. On the other
hand, if you look at, for example, oh, just
literature Shakespeare, uh all kinds of writers have often
talked about the importance of chance and luck. So
it's not like it hasn't been written about, but
it really hasn't been written about very much in
the social sciences, which is why one of the
reasons why I thought, well, this would be an
important book to write because it, it, it's, it
hasn't been talked about very much.
And uh we've already mentioned here briefly the role
that Chen and Luck play in. I mean, we're
going to get more into how they play out
in people's individual lives. But we've already mentioned how
in ancient civilizations, people really acknowledge that role and
also in very big uh worldwide events, like for
example, the asteroid. But when it comes to human
history itself, it also plays a role there, right?
Could you give us an example of that?
Right. It absolutely plays a role. There are so
many examples in history of history being changed by
a random event now, here's the thing we often
think about history. We only have one history to,
to contemplate, we only have one timeline to come.
So we think, oh, it had to play out
that way. Well, no, as history is, is unfolding,
it could go many, many different directions. And so
I give a lo uh several different powerful examples
and, and we can easily talk about some of
those. But, you know, just, just to highlight, you
know, the idea of Hitler coming to power in,
in, in the 19 thirties. Um There were several
events in which that may very well not have
happened. Uh I talk about the Cuban missile crisis
and we almost had World War three, but for
a Russian sailor getting his foot stuck on a
submarine conning tower ladder, if that hadn't happened, we
might have very well had World War Three. Um
THE idea of social movements and how social movements
start oftentimes the idea and the impetus behind the
movement has been building over a long period of
time, but it's certain chance events that spark that
movement. And so whether it's the Arab Spring or
the Black Lives Matter Movement here in the United
States, um It's often a chance event that, that
can spur that. So if you look at history
is a history is filled of, of all of
these kinds of events and, and it's, you know,
it's very, it's very interesting and very provocative to
think about how our history could be much different.
But for chance and luck.
So just for people to get a better understanding
of what you are mentioning there, could you tell
us about, uh, how chance and luck played out
in, for example, the defeat of the Equal Rights
Amendment in the early 19 seventies?
Yeah, that's a great, that's a great example. And
it's somebody who, um, I interviewed here in Saint
Louis who is from Saint Louis, Missouri, uh Phyllis
Laffy. So she was um a very conservative advocate
and um she was really considered the one who
really stopped the Equal Rights Amendment from becoming law
in the United States. So the Equal Rights Amendment
was um was written, I think in 1971. And
basically, it says that uh that there should not
be discrimination on the basis of, of sex or
gender. Uh That was it, uh you know, it
was pretty straightforward. And what happened was that um
uh got out of Congress and it was being
voted on by the States and it got to,
it needed 38 states for passage and 35 states
passed it. But Phyllis Schlafly got really involved in
this and was really the key person to um
to prevent it from passing. Now, I had an
interview with her uh before she was 86 at
the time and we started talking about how did
you get involved in the Equal Rights Amendment? And
she said, you know, it was a complete chance
event. I got a telephone call one day from
a friend of mine at a Connecticut library and
the friend asked me, uh, would you like to
come out and give a lecture as part of
our series? And, um, and Phyllis said, well, sure.
II, I, I'd, I'll give a lecture on national
security. That's what she was interested in. She was
interested in the arms race between the US and
the Soviets. And the friend said, no, no, we'd
like you to hear about, uh, we'd like you
to, to talk about this thing that's going around
now called the Equal Rights Amendment. And Phyllis said,
well, I don't know anything about that. I, I
don't, you know, and the friend said, well, let
me send you some material and I think you
would be interested in this. So the friend sent
the material. Phyllis did give the lecture that did
stimulate her in terms of getting involved in this,
in the fight to prevent the amendment from passing.
And so I asked her, I said, if you
hadn't gotten that random telephone call, would you have
gotten involved? And she said, no, I wouldn't have
or if I had it would have been much
too late. So in this case, history, the idea
of a constitutional amendment being prevented was spurred by
a random telephone call. Now, here's the other aspect
of this story and this is where we can
get into how do we respond when a chance
event happens? So when that happened, she could have
said no, I'm not gonna give that lecture. I'm
sorry. But she thought, well, let me consider this.
So when, when we, as I talk about in
the book, chance and luck interact with other forces
and that's the dynamics of life is how these
things come together. So it's not simply a fait
accompli, there are things that happen beyond our control,
but how do we respond to them? Are we
aware of them? You know, one of the things
I talk about in the book is the idea
of serendipity in scientific discoveries. That's a good example
of chance events happening along with the awareness and
the skills of the scientist. So anyway, so the,
but the story of Phyllis Laffey is a, is
just a, you know, when you think about it,
a a telephone call out of the blue, changed
history and changed it in a pretty dramatic way.
So you mentioned scientific discoveries there. Could you tell
us about an example of how luck and chance
reps have played the role in some of those
scientific discoveries?
Yeah. So there's been many cases of scientific discoveries
that have been stimulated by a chance of that,
probably the best known one is the discovery of
penicillin um which really was discovered by a, a
Petri dish being left out um over the weekend
and the scientists realizing that there was something here
that he wasn't aware of. But when you look
at um, things like x-rays or microwaves or velcro
many, many examples. Uh EVEN, even the discovery of
DNA had a, had a, had a serendipitous moment
to it. Um But in all of these cases,
what happened was something occurred that was outside of
the box that the scientist w had not imagined.
And the issue is, did they consider that? First
of all, were they aware of it? Did they
consider it or did they just discard it? And
if they did consider it, what was their reaction
to that? And so again, that's the idea of
the interaction of chance and luck with the skills
and talents of a scientist, Louis Pasteur had the
famous quote of saying chance favors the prepared mind.
And that's exactly what he was talking about, is
that chance and luck happened? But are you prepared
to take advantage of those events when they occur?
Mhm. Uh Tell us also about technological innovations. Of
course, science and technology usually are intimately linked. But
when it comes to technological innovations themselves, uh how
does role, how does a chance and luck manifest
in terms of how technological innovations are invented, discovered
and stuff like that? Yeah.
Well, I think again, it would be the idea
of, um there are certain uh forces that lead
to technological innovations and there's certain, you know, um
you know, the, the, the training of the scientists
and all of that. But again, there are certain
things that can happen out of the blue in
the scientific process that can lead to scientific and
technological innovation. So again, I mentioned the idea of
x rays, the idea of microwaves. Um MANY, there's
just many, many examples of that where, where that
has occurred. And again, it's this idea of the
interaction between chance and luck and training skills and
so forth.
Mhm So let's talk now a little bit about
some of the different ways that randomness chance like
influence our lives and our lives play out. So
how much of a lottery is just our birth?
For example, I mean, the parents, we are born
to our place of origin, the time period and
the quart size we are born into, I mean,
how do those kinds of factors influence our lives?
It's unbelievable. And, and so I have a chapter,
you know, that that is called the lottery of
birth. But think about this Ricardo, the idea that
you and I are even were even born. The
odds of that are unbelievable. First of all, your
parents had to find each other and, and as
we know, and I talked later in the book
about this is almost universal that when people get
together, it's almost always there's a chance element to
that. You know, if I had been five minutes
early, five minutes late, if I hadn't been to
that party. What? Anyway, your parents had to find
each other. Their parents had to find each other.
Their parents had to find each other. I mean,
think of the odds of that then the sperm
with your name on had to find the egg
out of, out of millions of sperm. So just
think the odds of us being born at all
are zillions to one. And one of the things
that I say about that is, you know, if
you really think about it, you should be really
grateful that you're even here and make the most
of the time that you have here. So that's
one thing in terms of the lottery of birth.
But then as you point out, you know, our,
our genetic background, our race, our gender, where what
country we're born in, whether our parents were rich
or poor. All of this is the lottery of
birth that you know, had, we had nothing to
do with this. You know, it, it was a
lot of randomness and chance. So right from the
get go, there's this huge element of chance in
our lives.
So tell us more perhaps about how factors like
gender, race and social class influence life outcomes.
Yeah. So here's the way I like to think
about it. And I think it's a good way
of, of bringing these things together. As I said
before, I'm trained as a sociologist and sociologists are
often interested in, in, in, in uh factors such
as class, race and gender and the way I
like to think about it is that those are,
we might think of those as currents that push
our lives in certain directions. So we know if
you're coming from a certain class, you know, whether
you're poor or whether you're rich that's going to
have an effect on life outcomes similar in terms
of race and in terms of gender. But within
those currents are all the ripples of randomness and
chance. So, you know, it, it, it, it, it's
the idea of currents and ripples that have an
effect on how our life plays out. So within,
you know, particular social class, there's all kinds of
chance events that happen. But an interesting thing is
that those chance events may be different than if
you're in a different current. So the kinds of
events that happen to me, if I'm raised in
a, in a family that's poor versus a family
that's rich, there's also there's going to be a
lot of luck and chance. But those kind of
luck and chance events may very well, in fact,
they will differ. And so that's another way of
thinking about how these things come together. You know,
the sort of currents that push our lives in
certain directions and the kind of chance events that
happen along the way. The other thing that I
mentioned is that there are certain things that can
happen to us that push us, there are chance
events that push us into a different current, you
know, some kind of dramatic event that might happen
by chance that results in sort of us, you
know, being pushed into another current, uh, in terms
of our life's direction. So, but I think it's
a, it's a good way to think about how
these things come together. It's not, life is not
all chance, randomness and luck, nor is life all
just predetermined and structural. It's the combination of the
two.
Mhm. Uh But uh factors or social categories like
gender, race, social class, particularly if you are part
of a gender or a race that is more
disadvantaged or uh lower in socio-economic state definitely plays
a big role in your life outcomes. I mean,
it increases your probability of having negative life outcomes.
It does indeed. And so I talk about this
idea of cumulative advantage or cumulative disadvantage. So if
you're starting life with certain advantages, like you're coming
from a family with a lot of resources, economic
resources, those advantages are probably going to lead to
other advantages. And so in this way, there's a
cumulative process and we might think about it. If
we want to put it in the context of
luck, we might think about it as good luck
leading to more good luck. On the other hand,
if you're born into a family in poverty, there's
going to be a cumulative process of disadvantage because
you're gonna start with fewer resources. The education you're
gonna get is probably not nearly as good as
somebody with a lot of resources that's going to
lead to other disadvantages. And so there's very much
this cumulative process that happens. And, and a lot
of my earlier work on poverty and inequality talks
about how this plays out. And I think that
it's, it's a really important process that we often
don't give enough attention to.
Yeah, since you mentioned that, tell us now about
some of your work on poverty and how it
links to those kinds of topics to exploring these
books. So for example, how does how can chance
be disastrous for poor people?
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. I mean, that was, that's one
of the reasons how I got into this particular
topic. So a lot of my earlier work is
looking at what is the likelihood of poverty, not
in a given year, but over the course of
a lifetime, over the course of 2030 40 years.
And what I've shown using, you know, pretty large
data here is that the risk of experiencing a
year of poverty in the United States is actually
pretty substantial. So depending on how you measure poverty
between, I would say two thirds and three quarters
of all Americans at some point in their adulthood
will experience a year of poverty. Now, why is
that? Well, part of it has to do with
bad luck striking people when you think over a
long period of time, things can happen that you
didn't anticipate like losing a job, you know, a
AAA factory shutting down uh getting sick, a pandemic
happening. All of these things can come out of
the blue and can throw you into it can
throw you downward in terms of economics. And when
that happens, particularly in the United States, we don't
have a very strong social safety net. And so
the result is that people often do fall into
poverty. And that's why this is one of the
things that I'm sure we'll talk about in a
little bit. One of the lessons of all this
is to say, you know, if you do understand
that bad luck can strike, then what you want
to do in terms of your social policy is
base it on the idea of social insurance. This
is the idea behind social insurance. You know, we
buy home insurance or auto insurance, not because tomorrow
I think I'm gonna have an accident, but I
realize that down the road something bad may I
may have some bad luck and as a result,
I wanna have some protection in place to protect
me from that bad luck. Um That's the whole
idea here. But, but yes, you know, my work
on poverty showed that uh much of poverty is
the result of kind of these structural kind of
bad luck kind of things that happen to people.
And um and, and that's a really important reason
for why you find over a course of a
lifetime, the risk of poverty is so high.
And I guess that it would also be true
that for people who have a good economic safety
net, I mean, if they have an accident, if
something bad happens, it is much easier for them
to eventually recover than for people who have very
little or already, or because, I mean, they actually,
in certain circumstances need help from other people. Otherwise
it's virtually impossible for them to recover.
That's exactly right. And that, that's a really interesting
example of a similar chance of that can play
out quite differently depending on where you are in
the social class structure. Another example that I give
is um being struck by cancer. So this is
an cancer is, is an example where actually randomness
is really important. So depending on the type of
cancer that you develop, we know that there's a
genetic component to, to um developing cancer, there's an
environmental component, but there's very much of a random
component. Cancer is the result of random mutations in
the DNA in the cellular structure. So it can
many times there was nothing you could do about
it at all. I I it's just bad luck.
Now, when cancer strikes the way it plays out
may be much different for somebody that has a
lot of resources versus somebody that has few resources.
So we here in the United states, we don't
have universal health care. So if you're at the
bottom of the social ladder, you may not have
insurance at all. And if you get that diagnosis,
it could be a death sentence. On the other
hand, if you have good insurance, you caught it
early, you might very well be able to continue
and have a good life. But there's, there's similar
kind of chance bad luck of a cancer diagnosis
can play out much differently depending on where you
are in the social structure.
Mhm. Yeah. And that really contrasts with what we
have in many places in Europe, even here where
I live in Portugal because we have universal health
care and of course, it's not a perfect system,
but at least uh there's a very small probability
of people uh not getting access to the treatments
they need or falling into huge debt. So that's
right. And you know, and you think about this,
you know, Portugal, almost all other countries have some
kind of universal health care coverage. United States is
very much an outlier. But the question is, you
know, well, why, why do we have health insurance
again? The idea is to prevent and to protect
against bad outcomes in terms of your health. Like,
you know, part of it is prevention, you wanna,
you know, do the right things and have the
support for that. But when something does happen, you
wanna have a safety net in place. So again,
in thinking about social policy, the idea of chance
and luck is really, really important.
And on the topic of uh economics, uh you've
also done some work on economic inequality. So this
chance also play a role there in amplifying economic
inequality. And if so what might be some of
the worst? I don't know, social economic political consequences
of having huge levels of economic inequality?
Yeah. So I'm, I'm actually, I've done a fair
amount of work on that subject and I'm working
on a book right now with a friend of
mine in economics on American inequality and thinking about
that um to make a long story short inequality
in the United States and, and it is true
in some other countries as well. But in the
United States in particular, has gotten quite wide over
the last 50 years. So if you look at
income inequality or wealth inequality, the gap between the
top and the bottom has gotten wider. Um So,
uh but, but one of the things I talk
about in the book is that chance and luck
can accentuate these inequalities. And this goes back to
that idea, we were talking about with cumulative advantage
or cumulative disadvantage that if you're starting out with
certain advantages, those will tend to accumulate over time.
Whereas if you're starting out with disadvantages, those will
also accumulate. So where people are starting, if you
have wide differences in where people are starting and
then you let that play out the inequalities are
going to get even wider. There's a good example
of how this plays out in the United States,
which again, we're very much of an outlier the
way that we fund uh K through 12 education.
So from kindergarten to uh to through high school
in the United States, the funding for, for education
is to a large extent from the local community
and a local district, the local tax district, it's
not funded on a federal level. The result of
that is that if you live in a wealthy
community, your your school district will have a lot
of resources. But if by chance and luck, you're
born into a poor community, your school district is
not gonna have a lot of resources. And so
the quality of education varies quite dramatically in the
United States, depending on the community you live in.
That's not the case in a lot of other
countries where you have, it's more centrally organized in
terms of the funding. So that's another example of
how uh chance and luck can accentuate the inequalities
in society. And it's particularly the case here in
the United States.
Uh Yeah. And the second part of my question
was what would be some of the worst possible
social, economic political consequences of big levels of economic
inequality? I I'm asking you this because sometimes we
hear from people that economic inequality itself is not
really a problem. It depends on the perception people
have of it being fair or unfair and things
like that. So
yeah. Yeah. Yeah, really good question. And a lot
of times people will say, well, economic in inequality
isn't necessarily a problem if you have a lot
of mobility in the income distribution, if people are
able to go from the bottom to the top.
The problem with that is that also over the
last 50 years, there's been less and less economic
mobility in the United States. It's harder to go
from, it's very hard to go from rags to
riches in the United States. We have less mobility
than a number of other European countries. Um But
here's, here's the, here's the deal with in terms
of the cost of this inequality. So in the
United States, childhood poverty is really, really high. We
have some of the highest rates of childhood poverty
of any western industrialized country. Now, the question is
what that I asked a few years ago in
a, in a study, what actually is the economic
cost of that childhood poverty to society as a
whole? So we did an analysis and we were
quite conservative. We looked at the effect that childhood
poverty has on greater health care costs on less
economic productivity. Because when Children become adults and if
they're raised in poverty, they're gonna be less economically
productive and increased criminal justice costs. So we estimated
that in the United States on an annual basis,
childhood poverty was costing again from a conservative perspective,
slightly over $1 trillion a year. That was to
put it in perspective about 28% of the entire
federal budget. So the question here is not, are
we paying or not paying? The question is how
are we going to pay for this? And what
we are winding up doing in the United States
is we pay for the problem of poverty on
the back end, we pay for it because we
have higher health care costs and all these other
things rather than preventing poverty on the front end.
And it's always more effective to deal with a
social problem on the front end than the back
end. You know, the idea of a, of a
ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure
is sort of the saying that applies to this.
The other thing that we did in this study
is we estimated for every, um for every dollar
that you spent on reducing childhood poverty, you say
between seven and $12 down the road in those
other costs. So it's a, so my point being
reducing poverty is not only the morally right thing
to do, but it's economically the smart thing to
do as well.
And even particularly when it, when it comes to
Children, I guess that we could also say that
investing in them, of course, it's a long term
investment but it eventually pays out because if they
stay in poverty, they will be also. So even
from just a purely economic standpoint, less productive,
that's, that's exactly right. You know, one of the
best investments you can do in terms of social
policy is to invest in the potential of Children
to invest in their human um resources and human
capacity. That's like the best, this, the, the, the
dumbest thing to do is to have Children in
poverty, Children that are hungry because just as you
said, they're going to become adults and they're not
going to be as productive as they could be.
And these are the Children that are going to
be paying for our social programs down the road.
So again, it's very smart to invest in, in,
in, in folks, you know, sort of human potential.
And that's, you know, one of the things I
talk about not so much in this book, but
in other places is what the goal of social
p I believe what the goal of social policy
should be is to allow everyone to reach their
potential, whatever that may be, you know, people's potential
varies. You know, we might be strong in some
things and weak in others. But whatever that potential
is, we should have policies in place that allow
people to get to that level. And what we
do here in the United States is we often
don't allow people to get to their potential. And
that's, that's wrong morally and it's wrong economically.
So changing topics. Now, I've asked you about the
lottery of our birth earlier. What about even throughout
our lives, the careers we choose who and if
we marry where we live is that also influenced
by chance and luck.
Oh, absolutely. I mean, it's like that is so
influenced by Chen. So the specifics, for example, who
you marry or who your significant other is the
specific person that you wind up with is very
much by chance. I mean, this is almost a
universal kind of thing. I've talked to a lot
of people, almost everybody will say, you know, if
I had been a couple minutes early, a couple
of minutes late, I wouldn't have, I wouldn't have
run into my significant other. Now, they would have
gone, run into somebody else. That's true. You, you
would, you would find other people but you wouldn't
have found that person. Um, SO who we actually
wind up with in terms of our, our close,
you know, friends and our associates is very much
the luck of the draw, the specific job that
we find ourselves in. Now, we might have had,
you know, we, we, we, we, we, we had
sort of intentions to go into a certain profession
or a certain field. But the specific job you
find yourself in is very much influenced by luck
and chance. You know, certain jobs may be open,
other jobs weren't open by the, when you were
looking for jobs, all of that same thing is
true where you live, you know, in the United
States here, we have a lot of people that,
that buy a home, but only so many homes
are available on a, on the, on the housing
market at a particular point in time. So, you
know, where you live is very much influenced by
chance and luck. So these specifics in our lives,
if people think about that, there's a huge amount
of luck and chance in those specifics.
And what we have to keep in mind here
is if any of these things or all of
them changed, our lives would have been completely different.
Right. Absolutely. So, I'll, I'll give you one example
of, uh, relate to myself. And, um, I'm here
at, at Washington University, which is a university here
in Saint Louis. And, uh, I came here, first
of all, the reason I got the job here
was very chance. I was on the job market.
Um, IN the academic world, it's very competitive. Uh,
THERE are only a few jobs available. You got
to kind of go where, where they are. So
anyway, I got the job here. But, um, a
friend of mine after about three or four years,
a friend of mine, I, I randomly ran into
them in the hallway and they said to me
and, and I, I was in the sociology department
and she was in the social work department, social
work school. And she said to me, um, you
don't, actually, we have a job open in social
work that you might be interested in. Now, I
had this was no idea at all. No idea.
And I happened to just run into her and
I thought, well, and she said, maybe you should
apply to it. It's in your area. It's poverty
and inequality. And I thought, well, ok, I'll, I'll
apply to it to make a long story short.
I got the job and two weeks later the
university announced they were closing the sociology department here.
So if I had not had that meeting with
that person, I would not have been, remained in
Saint Louis. I would have been somewhere else and
it was complete chance. I never would have known
about that job if she hadn't told me about
it. And that's very true in the job. A
lot of it is word of mouth, you know,
that you hear about this or you don't hear
about that very much chance. So that's just one
little example in my life. As you said, my
life would have been much different. I might not
be sitting here. Right. I probably wouldn't be sitting
here right now with you talking about this book
because I would have gone somewhere else. My research
might have gone a different direction. Uh, YOU know,
I mean, it's, it's amazing when you think about
it.
Right. And it's not just about the careers or
jobs we choose. But it's also about how successful
we become. Chance also plays a role in that.
Like, for example, at a certain point in your
book, you talk about how uh some actors and
musicians, for example, are able to achieve so much
fortune and fame and others. Not so much.
Absolutely. That the entertainment field is one where you
really see the influence of uh of good luck.
And so actors and musicians will often tell you,
you know, if I hadn't gotten that lucky break
early in my career, I wouldn't be where I
am today. And I give this story in an
earlier life. I was very much involved in music
and, and singer songwriter kinds of things. And I
met a lot of really talented musicians and only
a couple of them really made it kind of
commercially. But I can tell you that many of
the people were just as talented. But the difference
between those who really made it was not the
talent, but it was getting the lucky break. There
had to be a baseline level of skills and
talent and creativity, of course, but there's lots of
people who are talented and creative that never make
it because they never got the lucky break. Another
example of this is in the literary world. If
you look at um, authors, you know, Hemingway or
uh JK Rowling or, um, you know, uh the
Writer of Gone With The Wind, they were rejected
over and over and over again. Now we know
the quality of their work was really good. But
because of randomness because a publisher wasn't interested at
the time or whatever they were rejected. But, and
here's one of the morals of the story, they
persevered and by persevering, they used chance over the
long run to their favor. Because if you have
more irons in the fire, you're more likely to
see the skill or the talent um come into
play. But the downside of that is how many
authors Ricardo have got, have had a lot of
talent and skills, but they gave up because theyre
rejected one too many times and we've never heard
of them. Yeah. You know, and, and it's the
same true in music and acting. So that's those
are professions where you really see the impact of
a, a lucky break being really, really important. And
again, any, almost any actor will tell you the
same story. Mhm.
A and in this particular case of highly competitive
areas or domains, uh it is really, it makes
it really obvious that many times. It's not uh
really a matter of the most successful people being
the better at what they do, which is that
they were the ones that got the chances, the
opportunities or uh good. I mean, the chance events
happened to them and not to the others.
Yes. And, and this sort of goes against um
this, what I say is this splashes some cold
water on the idea of meritocracy. So the idea
of meritocracy is that, oh if you're successful, you
merit that success or if you're unsuccessful, you merit
that unsuccessful um uh uh life. And what this
does is, it says, well, skills and talent are,
are certainly important, but they're not the only part
of the story here. And, and another way I
like to think about it is skills, talent determination.
All of those are certainly important ingredients. They may
be necessary ingredients for getting ahead, but they're not
sufficient conditions. And there's been empirical work that shows
that those who really make it on the top
or, you know, particularly on the top, certainly have
a baseline level of skills and talent, but they
always got some lucky breaks. That's what distinguishes those
who are really successful from those who are not.
And so again, this really kind of is counter
to the idea that, oh, the world is simply
one that operates on, on the basis of meritocracy.
And that's, that's I think an interesting lesson here
because you know what Meritocracy says is that those
who do well deserve it and those who don't
also deserve it. And this is saying, you know
what the idea of deserving or undeserved, we need
to kind of rethink that a bit.
Mhm. And why is it, why do you think
that individuals or many individuals, not all people, of
course, are often on and aware of the role
that luck and chance play in their lives. I
mean, is there any specific psychological mechanism?
Yes, I think there is. And I think one
of the reasons why people really discount the idea
of good luck in their lives is because they
feel it takes away from their accomplishments, it takes
away from their efforts and skills. And what I
would argue is that it's just another component, you
know, if you wanna be realistic about the world,
let's, let's look at that. Um But here, here's
a, here's a great kind of analogy. Um THAT
shows you uh I think what happens. So I,
I'm a big bicyclist cyclist. I, I like to
ride and this afternoon, in fact, I'll go for
a long ride and when you're riding your bike
and the wind is at your back, you don't
notice it at all and you're thinking I'm doing
great. I'm writing, I'm so strong, I'm just going
to, it's only when you turn back into the
wind that you realize. Wow, I was getting a
lot of help and that's what happens with people.
They don't, they don't acknowledge the help that they've
gotten in terms of their success. Um Because again,
they feel that either they're not just oblivious to
it or they feel that it takes away from
their success. And again, uh II, I would say,
you know, that that's not the way that the
world works that it's fine to say. Yeah, I
put in a lot of work and effort, but
I also got some lucky breaks along the way.
I got some good breaks.
And how does individual agency come into the picture
then? Because after we looked across this entire world
of randomness here, then what place uh is there
any place for individuals agency? And if so how
can we react to chances?
Yeah. Really good question. So one of the things
that I talk about, one of the lessons that
we can learn from recognizing chance and luck in
our lives is the idea of being open to
opportunities that may come our way. Um And so
this is, this kind of goes back to what
we were talking about with serendipity and scientific discoveries.
When chance and luck events strike, are we aware
of them? Uh ARE, are we, are we uh
do we take advantage of some things that may
happen to us that we didn't anticipate at all?
I think that's a really important lesson um to
learn is to when you wake up in the
morning, you sort of think, OK, my day is
gonna go a certain way, but there's always the
chance that something will happen that will be random
or that were, was out of the blue. And
what do you do with that? And that's where
agency comes into play. How do I I have
control over how I might respond to something like
that? I can ignore it. I can think about
it. I could act on it. That's where kind
of agency interacts with chance and luck. And one
of the other analogies I use is II, I
say that, you know, life is kind of like
um randomness is like a dance partner that we
have as we make our way across the dance
floor of life. And it's the combination of two
partners, one leads, the other 1 may lead, but
the interaction of the two. So it's agency along
with chance and luck that give life its dynamic
quality.
And so do you think that if people learn
about the role that randomness, chance and luck play
in their lives, if they read your book and
they learn about all of this, that it on
an individual level, it might help them deal better
with uncertainty in their lives.
Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, one of the things that
I think uh an important lesson here is that
we think um when we discount the idea of
chance and luck, we often blame ourselves. So go,
let's go back to the example of, of cancer
of a cancer diagnosis, people often will say what
could I have done differently? What, what, how could
I have changed my diet or how could I
have whatever my lifestyle and that may have been
a factor. But there also may be cases where
there was nothing you could do. There was nothing
at all. And, and what that does is it
really, it can relieve the burden of blame on
yourself and that can be a real gift. There
was a book that was written a long time
ago by a, a rabbi who said, who the
title of the book was? Why do bad things
happen to good people? Why does God allow that
to happen? And his answer is, it's simply random.
You can turn to God for, for, for support
and, and all of that, but don't necessarily blame
God. It was random. And if you accept that
it again, it can relieve a great burden upon
you because we often want, wanna say, what could
I have done wrong or what could I have
done better? You know, what could I have changed?
That would have resulted in a different outcome. Sometimes
there's nothing you could have done. It was simply
bad luck. So that's one that's one kind of
uh lesson there that I think is, is a
really important one is that, you know, chance and
luck um relieve us from some of that burden
of, of always blaming ourselves for what we could
have done.
And earlier, when we talked about poverty and economic
inequality, you mentioned at a certain point that it
is also important for people who design social policies
to keep in mind the role that randomness and
chance events play in people's lives. So do you
think that even reps beyond uh poverty and economics.
Politicians should keep randomness in mind when designing social
policy.
Absolutely. Absolutely. I mean, the whole idea again of
social policy, a lot of it is designed to
address some of the bad luck that can happen
to people down the road. I think another aspect
of this is when you accept the fact that
there are good breaks in life, there are bad
breaks in life. One, it, it, it instills a
sense of humility in your success. I didn't do
it all on my own. I got some breaks
along the way. I should be a little bit
humble in terms of talking about my success. But
I should also have some empathy for those who
are in a less fortunate place because it may
have nothing to do with them. It may have
just been, you know, the lottery of birth or
whatever it may be. And the idea of empathy
I think is really important in terms of thinking
about social policy. You know, when we are empathetic
towards other, then we're gonna say, you know what,
maybe we should have some things in place to
help folks and protect people. So I think that
that's, that's very much the case.
Mhm So my last question then will be and
you've already talked a little bit about meritocracy earlier.
But let me ask you uh within this framework
that you present in the book, is there still
place for any form of meritocracy and if so
how would it need to be reframed?
Yeah, I think it's, I think that the way
you put that is, is reframed is a really
important aspect of this, that there certainly are, you
know, life and, and how, how outcomes occur during
life are, are affected by a lot of things.
Um, THEY'RE affected by many, many things and one
of them is, is sort of the, um, you
know, our abilities or our determination, the decisions we
make, all of these things are important. But again,
the dynamic of life is not just that it's
also how these things interact with chance, random, randomness
and luck. And so yes, there's something to be
said for meritocracy, but we need to tweak kind
of our idea about it. It's not just complete
meritocracy neither is it just all chance and luck?
Um So I think that that's, that's, that's really
important. Here's another thing that II I wanna bring
out. Um BECAUSE sometimes, you know, the idea of
thinking about chance and luck is, is seen in
a negative way. I would like to reframe this
in a very positive way. And, and here's what
I mean by that. Imagine if there were no
chance or luck at all in the world, imagine
everything was a fait accompli what a boring life.
That would be. How boring would that be if
there was no chance when I wake up in
the morning? I think, OK, my life today is
gonna play out a certain way. But there's always
this element of chance and luck. And that's what
gives life its spice. That's what gives life its
dynamic quality is that there's always a chance something
out of the blue may happen. And that's a
real gift. I think that's like, that's what makes
life really interesting. So, II, I would ask listeners
to kind of think about that as well as
a real positive aspect of the world of chance.
Luck and randomness.
Great. So the book is again, The Random Factor.
How chance and luck profoundly shape our lives and
the world around us. I'm leaving a link to
it in the description of the interview. When doctor
rank. Apart from the book, would you like to
tell people where they can find you and your
work on the internet?
Oh, sure. Um If you just Google um Mark
Rank, um you know, my, my website and stuff
will come up. I have AAA website dealing with
issues of poverty and inequality too that a lot
of people um have, have accessed over the years.
It's called Confronting Poverty. If you just go, if
you just type that in, it'll pop up. Um
So yeah, there's, there, there are several places where
you can kind of get more information and, and
the book itself should be available just about anywhere.
Great. So, Doctor Rank, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come. On the show.
It's been a really fascinating conversation.
Oh and Ricardo spot on questions. And my last
piece of advice is don't forget to count your
lucky stars.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by the N Lights
learning and development. Then differently check the website at
N lights.com and also please consider supporting the show
on Patreon or paypal. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick
Suno, Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew
Whitten Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors,
Philip Forrest Connolly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre. Francis for Agns Ferus and
H her meal and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel s
friends, David Sloan Wilson. Ya dear, Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte, Bli Nico Barba Adam Hunt,
Pavla Stassi na Me, Gary G Alman Sam of
Zed YPJ Barboza, Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner
Douglas Franca, Beto Lati W Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio, Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore. Larry Dey junior. Old
Ebon Starry Michael Bailey then spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dvor. Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica. No week. Linda Brendan Nicholas Carlson, Ismael
Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perras, Kate Van
Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi
Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David Pins
of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A
special thanks to my producers is our web, Jim
Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.